Speaker A: Approach it, the right way of thinking, the right way of speaking, etc. Etc. And that's what we did in the first module. So you're going to notice here that I'm now going to be more explicitly religious in content. Now I'm going to add one more layer of context in terms of where I'm coming from teaching this. So, yes, you, I guess in the last few sessions you've known things about me already. Like I'm someone who very much enjoys life. I enjoy, you know, being with friends, traveling, mixing drinks and all of these things. So I, if you ask me, I am very much a person in this world. Right. But admittedly I am also somebody who's very religious, but not in an in your face distance or the way I just tell people that. Church is very much an important part of my life. So one thing, for instance, is that I go to Mass day. I don't force anyone to go to Mass daily, but certainly that's something I do to center myself and to reconnect myself to the more important things in life. But a lot of my weekends are also spent doing miniscule work. So one of the main things I do is that on Sundays, yes, I am a preacher. Yes, I am. So yeah, I have this community. So yeah, that's during one Sunday in our church in Alabama. So I'm part of a community in Alabama called the Feast. So the Feast is still a Catholic community founded by Bo Sanchez, but then it's also a Catholic community that has many, that has many different branches all around the city and all around the world. Actually, my particular piece, I'm just going to introduce my context. My particular piece is in Alabama, in a little place called East Alabama Northeast. That's our Instagram. So if you go to our Instagram, you'll also notice that there are little reels that we make coming from the Sunday preaching. So you're also going to see some of my fields there. If you'd like to follow it, feel free. You're not required. Obviously, if you're curious about where my context is, it's coming from the East Alabama. I'm also someone who's active in my neighborhood parish. I am the one man choir in one of our Sunday masses. So I play the guitar and then sing and people sing along with me. It's my neighborhood parish. I've grown up there. I've met some of my longtime childhood friends there. I first fell in love there. I mean, not just fall in love with Jesus, but like fall in love in a Puberty sort of way, you know, meeting my neighbors through the parish. This parish consists really just a few blocks away from my house. So in a way it also serves like our village's community center. So when I tell you about religion or when I talk to you about matters of faith, I'm also coming from that context of living it out myself. But don't worry, even if this is my context, I also acknowledge that there are many people who do not have this context and in fact have struggles with religion or probably have a conviction which is similar to being spiritual but not religious. So we're going to talk about all of that in this module. But as we do so. And again, pardon me, I don't have my clicker today, so I'll probably stay in more approximate areas around here. But before I dive in, I really want to talk to you about adobo and why adobo specifically my Lola eating adobo. Yeah, that's perfect. Wonderful. Is your adobo that dark? Can I see? Wait, can I see your adobo? Open your mouth. Thank you. No, yeah, that's all right. I prefer not adobo. No adobo. There's adobo that tastes really good at saying that. But the adobos that I'm about to talk about, the adobo I grew up with, and specifically the adobo that my Lola cooked is an adobo that's a lot darker, something like this. And what I like about this adobo is that, believe me, the first time I had it, I was about 7 years old. This is such a core memory for me. My Lola serves this adobo with garlic rice and the most perfect sunny side up in. So that when, for example, you're going to, you set it right on top of the garlic rice, the egg. And then when you open the egg, you know how when the yolk is faint and then it opens, it becomes super duper yellow, it goes. And then you put this adobo and it's heavenly. That was my first glimpse of heaven. It's having Hydrola's adobo when I was seven years old. And every time I have this adobo, it really does feel like an out of body experience for me. It's damn, damn good. I'm sharing this to you because this is going to be the key analogy of this entire module. My Lola's adobo. And there are four things that I just want to say about it. The first is that I eat my Lola's unbelievably delicious adobo. And as I told you, it's an out of body experience. I'm still so mind blown by it even today. But my Lola is not here anymore. And that's sad, of course, but which is why even before my Lola passed away, there was something about that adobo that really inspired me to learn how to cook. I know how to cook and that's really so I believe in preserving my Rolla's cooking because of this experience of her adopto. So I decided to learn how to cook like her, this adobo and many other things that she wants. And then I actually learned how to cook her adobo by cooking every day. And that cooking indeed becomes part of my daily routines. Because it's one thing to want to cook and it's another to actually cook. That's the difference between this and this. But of course I can't learn how to cook on my own. I must learn from the community of cooks, be it my mom, house helps, etc. In order for me to become a better cook. And these days it also involves maybe watching YouTube videos, right? Maybe for those of you who hope to do something like that, because I really cannot be a good cook on my own, a lot of these techniques I learned from others. All of this really as a quick summary of our four main concepts for this sacred faith, spirituality and religion. I'm going to connect what I said about Adobo to these four things by the end of this. So I'm going to follow this format. Secret to me, spiritual, starting with number one. But first and foremost I want to ask, are you a mountain person or a beach? Who here are beach people? Raise your hand. Who here are mountain people? Raise your hand. Yeah, sure. Okay. For those who raise their hands as mountain people. Did you say you were a white person? Why do you like the mountain so much? I don't like the sun, like sun green. I like the breeze. Okay, so it's like a more cold feeling. Okay, so people like the cold breeze that comes to people mountain. In fact, I noticed that it's become one of like the new adulting hobbies. Like outside of work, people go to like mountains and find themselves in mountain climbing groups. Hiking groups. I think that's one building. Who here likes the ocean? Again, that's most people. Do you like the ocean, Hannah? Why is that? Sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry. Insect. Okay. It's very interesting that the way that you phrase why you like one other thing is because you don't like what the other thing has so yeah, more positively. Why is the beach a favorite for you?
Speaker B: Because this is a mountain. You hike stops, you go up. So there's a lot of struggle. Something I don't like about mountain compare beach. I know, it's more peaceful for me.
Speaker A: Yeah. And I tend to agree because if you ask me, I'm really more of a beach person. Many of my fun experiences growing up were really along the shore. Because I associate beaches with waking up at six in the morning and really just being there at the ocean. And that's where I feel the breeze certainly. Right. I associated with partying with my friends. Have you ever heard of a mountain party? Not just because of mountain parties, but beach parties? Because I'm more extroverted. I like those anecdotally. Okay. I don't think there's any real sense study about this, but my guess is that if you tend to be more introverted, you probably like the mountains more. If you're more extroverted, you'd probably like to beach more. That's just my guess. Okay. Of obviously. But here's the best reason why I love to beach everybody. And it's that somehow whenever I stand on the shore like this, I really feel small. And I rarely feel small, as you can tell, right? Or I think a better way to put it is that I get a sense that there's something far greater than me, that there's a greater scheme of things. But of course you can feel it on a mountain too. So see, whether it's a mountain or a beach, when you're really right smack in the middle of nature and you're enveloped by its grandeur, you feel small and in some sense you have a healthy sense of self forgetfulness. What do I mean by that? I think one of the most anxious experience experiences in our life is when we're so self conscious. When you focus on nothing else but your own concerns and your own problems. And when you're so fearful to dare to do other things because you're too self conscious. But I think that's why people go to mountains and beaches, for education. Because in some sense they just forget it all and they become absorbed with where they are. Am I making sense here? For some people it's places that make them feel like they're part of a grander scheme of things. But for others it could be people. For others it could be moments. So see, whether in places or people or experiences, have we ever had those moments where we feel that life is just so much more than what we perceive? But that's My point, you see, isn't there something more than just me waking up each day to do the next thing I have to do on my master's. What I'm talking about here, everybody, is that feeling of. Or that sense of grandeur that we have, that feeling of being part of something more, or that there is indeed something more. This. Everyone, let's call this the secret. Or let's not to call it the experience of the sacred feeling of being part of a grander scheme of things. Now let's look at that word for a moment. The word sacred. What exactly do we mean by the word sacred? It might be helpful if we examine its opposite, which is we. Not the word mundane, not the word profane. The way I want to approach this is to talk about the word quotidian. This is probably a new word for most, if not all of you. The word quotidian, right? It comes from the Latin word quotidianus. You just have to add us at the end. And cotidianus means daily. So when we think of the quotidian, we think of daily movements of our lives, right? The conclusion is where life hammers us. It's our daily, ordinary, non flashy attempts at surviving and thriving. You being part of this class between 12:30 to 2, you kind of dragging your ass here from five grids to annex. But it's part of the compilia. Now please take note everybody, that as you write that down, I'm not saying that being part of the quotidian is a negative experience. It's not. Most of our lives are lived in the quotidian. We get life done in the daily, but there is a possibility of getting sick, stuck in the continuum. You can get stuck in the Covidia and what I would describe as a washing machine existence. Have you ever had those moments where you feel like life is just this endless repetition of I'll wake up, take a crap, eat, go to school, I'll be in my classes, study a bit, do scroll, sleep, then you're gonna do again the same thing tomorrow, wake up, take a crap, etc. Etc. That life just becomes this endless meaningless cycle of just surviving. So you see, while the Covidian is where life happens, it's possible to get stuck. And when you don't take time to be aware of this stubbornness, your life can just be that going through an endless hamster. But the good news is that you don't have to get stuck in the building. And there are basic things that you can do in each day to make sure that you don't get caught up in the hamster rhythm that will give them. And you know the most basic way to do it? It's to simply ask the question, why? Why am I doing this? Why is this significant to you? Why is this meaningful? I mean, in your high schools, I'm sure you have heard some person tell you something like, you have to know what your why is. To the point that it kind of sounds a little corny when you keep hearing what's. Find your why. Find your why. But no matter how corny it is, it does point to a truth. Right? And the truth is that maybe it's good to examine the reason behind my life motions. The reason behind the motions. Why am I doing what I'm doing? And if I'm feeling stuck, maybe my reason for staying is not there anymore. Talk to each other. Sa. Why are you studying? Why? Because I want money. Why? Because I need that to play shooter. What we're trying to do here is meaningfully describe what the secret is. And we're doing that by, first example, the opposite, which is the quotidian. And we said that the quotidian is where life happens. It's not necessarily a bad thing, but you can get stuck in it. And one way that you can avoid getting stuck in it is to ask, why? Why are you here? Why is my life moving in this way? So having said that, sorry, go ahead. I watched this video where this guy explains how all of us have, like, some sort of causation loop. A causation loop. So then you keep asking, like, why am I here? And then you ask another why on top of that. And then at some point, it will lead to, like, a first cost of everything, which is apparently God, which I will talk about three classes from now, but thank you for bringing that up. So we're going to talk about causality at some point? Yes.
Speaker B: I just wanted to ask. You said earlier, but he didn't want to use profane or mundane to describe the deity or the why not. I mean, why?
Speaker A: Put this. Yeah. Because I think there's a lot of negative baggage with those words. When you say profane, it's something that sort of insults the Satan. When you see mundane, you're talking about a boring version of the contingent. It's like you're talking about the contiguan already in a judgmental sort of way. So I think the word contin is the one that feels more neutral. So what then is the secret? A preliminary definition. It's hard to really come up with a Clear dictionary definition. But a good place to start is this. That the Secret is an experience that opens you to life's deeper meaning. That the secret is this thing that opens you out to something greater than yourself. And that life is not just about going with the motions of our temporal existence. The secret opens you up in a way, surprises you, kind of leaves you emotional at times, makes you feel moved. Say that, wow, there's so much about life I still don't understand. I think that's the feeling that you get when you really encounter a mystery. Let me make it more complete. What's the experience of the sacred life? I think it's akin to the experience of falling in love. Okay. And this is not me sounding corny and finding something that I feel like you'll all be necessarily interested in. Because in the past, I know that there are a lot of people who don't like talking about falling in love, but you don't. I'm sure a number of you have had this experience and they. Some of you have not had this experience yet. But I think you all know one way or another, whether experientially or conceptually, that falling in love is both a thrilling and uncomfortable experience. Now, as we talk about the secret, everyone, I want you to pay attention to this tension. Pay attention to this tension that when you're incompetent. The secret, it's both a feeling of discomfort and also a feeling of attraction. It's thrilling. Somehow you desire that, you want it. At the same time, you feel blocked out of your comfort zone. The way they plucked out the character from the pygmy. But you get my point. Are taken out almost in an unplanned sort of way. When I show you this gif. You're familiar with this scene from her kids, right? Who has not watched the movie? Her video. How has your niece watched it and kissed? So. You wait. You have not watched the Disney animated movie Hercules? What? Really? We got a question. Have you watched the Disney animated movie Hercules? Who says yes? Okay, whoever says no, please watch this movie. Oh my God. In this particular scene, this is the girl that is falling in love with Hercules, Meg and Lynn, but she's resisting falling in love with Hercules. It is both a thrilling and an uncomfortable experience, people. I think you will agree at least to this. Next, please watch it. There's something about falling in love is that it bothers your usual way of going about. You don't know if you've ever had that before. Again, you don't have to tell me whether you've fallen in love or not. But for those of you who have. For those of you who develop a strange attraction to somebody, there's something about that feeling of attraction that just bothers you. You know, you're in the middle of studying and then the person just crosses your mind. You know, why am I thinking about this person? Bothersome about that experience. Let me put it in a more sophisticated way. There's something about falling in love that has an arresting quality to the love. It captures your attention so that you focus on this person whether you like it or not. Because. So see the tension? I like it, but this makes me uncomfortable. That is what the experience would be for the saint in its life as the German Lutheran theologian Rudolph Motopoid. When he talks about the experience of atmospheric. So he talks about this experience of being before the series arresting quality as the numinous. When I am before something greater than myself and beyond my comprehension. That's what he calls the experience of the numinous. And he described describes this experience in his famous Latin description that the numerous is mysterium clementum et frascinate. I'll say that again. That's mysterium tremendum efficinate. It's this. So that's the luminous again. Go for. Is my example falling in love. To illustrate for you how that experience is like. What does mysterio tremendum etfashionance mean? Three things. Let's start with the first Latin word, mysterio. When he talks about mysterio, you're talking about something that's beyond your imagination. Something that's always full. Something that's always so meaningful. For Rudolph Otto, experiencing the secret is experiencing something completely other from yourself. Completely other from yourself. You know, when you fully know something, or at least when you feel like you fully know something, it's very easy to take it for granted and discard it. But when you're dealing with something that you can't really understand, somehow it really captures your attention. Pardon me for this example, but you get that somehow when you try studying calculus, don't you? Right? Because there are many parts of it that you don't understand. You feel like your entire focus just has to be on that. Who gets more. You won't be so attentive to it if you don't get it somehow, your full attention is added. Am I making sense? Falling in love is the same way. If you think you completely get a person somehow you're going to not pay that much attention to them. But then when you ever have those phones? You're like that, right? I crafted the perfect text message to carry on the conversation. But three hours. Your attention is geared towards that. You don't understand, Bro. You know, back in grade six and I had messages I quintuple texted. Really? Back when I was like 12. Like, I was scrolling through the old messages. When's the last time you guys. I think when she greeted me on my birthday last year. Yeah. First wake month. Second. So the experience of the sacred is mysterious. You're dealing with something that is completely other from you and something that perhaps you really will not or cannot understand. That's why it's also commendable. It's terrifying. It's out of your control. Especially when you're someone who's so, you know, very, very proud of your singleness and that, you know, you're somebody. I would need somebody else to tell me what my worth is, right? To feel in love with somebody can be such an uncomfortable experience. It somehow messes with your. I like this phrase. It messes with their emotional wiring. Right? And all of these fears will come out, will come out from that. What if I get rejected? Why did I just re friend? What if my parents don't like this person? But daddy, I love him. What if. Or maybe other fears like what if this person is not who I thought this person was? Am I really willing to give my heart to someone who turns out as an asshole? But that's what they say every relationship is right. That every relationship is a risk. Every relationship is a risk. Guess what people, including a married man. Some people think that the moment that you start getting married to someone, the game ends. The dating game ends. You don't have to risk anymore because that person is legally binding or to save themselves. Sadly, in our reality, he know that's not always the case. That's why one of the whenever we have weddings, because that's what we say in vows. A vow is not something like, I'm going to choose you today. And you can guarantee I'm going to choose you every time. It's choosing somebody each day. And so the risk is, what if I don't get chosen? What if somebody else? Where something else takes over, like this person's heart. It's scary. It's terrifying. To be in front of the sacred is to be in such a vulnerable position that you realize you don't have full control. And yet somehow it's passionate. Passionate brings about the English word as fascinating. When you're fascinated by something, somehow it pulls you towards itself, it's attractive. I don't want pero. I also want, When you look at these teachings, Mysterium tremendum et passionates. That for is what we get whenever we encounter, in some sense, God. And what I've come to observe throughout the years is that you don't necessarily have to be a religious person to encounter God in this manner. Right. Quite often with Athenians especially. Because, you know, whenever I would think of Athenians, you don't meet a lot of religious people. But you do meet a lot of people who claim some kind of spirituality. It's like they want to figure out who God is, but they don't like religion. And again, as you're going to talk about later on, I don't blame them. They have many hang ups about the way religion talks about God. And somehow, in a way that they don't often care to admit. There's something quite attractive about him. The serum. Tremendous. So here's my Lola's adobo again. Whenever I eat it, I can't help but feel the arresting quality of this delicious adobo. Which expresses her love. But now, as I was saying in the bird's eye beauty analogy. What if I decide that my Dolla's adobo is worth preserving her generation? So, see, I taste it and then I decide, hey, I think I want to preserve it. The moment that I do that, what happens? I develop some relief relationship to him. I'm now creating some connection between me and Apotolkovich. This is my way of transitioning to talking about the experience of faith. So we talked about that. The secret. The experience of something greater than yourself. That Otto describes as disturbing, tremendous. But after that initial experience, they call it this. Now comes an invitation. An invitation to accept this experience as a part of your own life. So faith. What's faith? It's the acceptance of the sacred. Personally and ultimately. And it's good to take note of this. Because it's possible that your experience of the Secret can just become a passing experience. It's just something that you go through, but after you go through. Doesn't translate into anything more than just a passing moment. But faith is saying, this is mine experience. And there's something I want to do to make this experience very much a part of my life. But take note of this, that the Secret invites us to think. As you write that down, please don't forget this. Because what I'm about to tell you is something that when I relate to did, I really never forgot. And its influence shaped the way I've done faith. What am I going to say? That faith is not an imposition, but an invitation. You really cannot force faith on a person because faith is something that you choose. Religions can create the environment in which faith can be chosen, but faith can't be imposed, right? And from what you see and experience, what some of you have experienced, perhaps it's that the more you impose faith, the less attractive it becomes. Spoilers. See, this is what a lot of people miss, that faith is not an object we have, as it is a conviction we uphold. It's interesting because whenever we talk about faith, especially in Christian theology, they often think about faith as just this entire deposit. Teachings, right? You need to defend your faith. Meaning to say you have to defend all of these teachings, these precepts, these principles that you agree to, almost like you're depending upon, that you sign. But what you're going to see here, that faith isn't so much that list of things you say yes to, but it is a choice that you make to make the secret a part of your life. So does that mean that the concrete elements of faith don't matter? Look at what James Martin says in the reading. Okay, Jay, because I'm about to answer your question, could you please read what James Martin says on page two? Metaphor. While you already have the basics. Soil, seeds, water, you have to cultivate and nurture. Think of it this way, everyone. What religion does for you is that it gives you the materials to cultivate your faith, right? It gives you teachings, it gives you practices, it gives you certain ways of living, but you have to cultivate that yourself. And the way my faith looks like may have similarities to your faith, but it's going to be very different. Our faith can have similarities or that. Or let me put it this way, your way of relating to God and my way of relating to God may have similarities, but ultimately they are different. And I can't impose my way of relating to God to Leila's way of relating to God or CJ's or Jake's or anyone else. Am I making sense? Now we go to the six paths. I think it's important to ask, where are you in God? This is my way of putting it in some sort of. Sort of linear structure. My guess is that the moment that you reach adolescence, that's your teenage years, where a lot of you are, you go through what's called a period of disengagement. I'll say that again. You're going through a period of disengagement. What does that mean. It means that you are trying to discover your individual self apart from institutions and pre made structures. So growing up, for instance. Right. A lot of you, maybe even up to now, were obliged to go to mass on Sundays and to somehow live according to your church's way of morality. And I guess growing up, it's fun because you know, you're a kid and you don't know any better, but the moment that you're more conscious about your adult self, you're now starting to discover things a bit more. Maybe you're discovering for instance, your sexuality in a way that perhaps goes against what your religion has taught you, among other issues, obviously. So I wouldn't be surprised if many of you are here because that seems to be indicative of that period of this incident. Right. Remember that where you are on the six paths is largely influenced by the state of your life now. Right. It's not that you can just choose, oh, I think I'm going to be in the path of belief now. The choosing is not in what you see in your mind of how you live your life. So pay attention to the trajectory of your life and I think you'll get a better sense of where you are in the six path. Now, Jay was asking me before class began what the difference between the path of confusion and the path of exploration are. His the path of exploration talks about an openness to God, but you're trying many different kinds of religious paths and religious practices in order to figure that out. So in a way you still have a very positive view of religion, but your view of religion is that you're very open to all the many kinds of variations out there, whereas the path of confusion has a more negative view of religion because we've seen how for instance, religion has failed people, has enabled crimes, for example, or has become evil in its own way. So you're like, I believe in God, but I'm starting to really not like religious structures or why do I feel like religious structures are saying one thing but doing another and it Egypt abuse. Am I making sense here? That's the difference. Right. The difference is in how they see or feel making sense.
Speaker B: What is the difference among the meaning of confusion and independence since it both has more of negative view of religion
Speaker A: and yeah, independence I think has a very clear interest, individual shape. Right. Confusion, you're still sort of at that point where I want to be religious. But there are many things that are discouraging. Whereas independence, you're very clear, religion is okay. I think there's a lot of good in it, but I want to try things out completely by myself. Right. You know, so it doesn't necessarily translate into a negative view of religion. It just means that you want. It's similar to exploration. That's why they're so near to each other. A peaceful explanation. You're still open to different kinds of religious commitment. It's like what I would sometimes call church, but with independence. You're really starting to see less of the value of communal worship. I've seen when you come back.